<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!--
###############################################################################
##
## vim: set ts=2 sts=2 ft=xml tw=90 sw=2: -*- html -*-
##
## $Id: install-win32.dbk,v 1.7 2004/01/15 16:49:57 mkern Exp $
##
## Module:         Windows Installation Guide
## Description:    Instructions for building, configuring, and using giFT on
##                 Microsoft Windows.
##
## Copyright (C) 2001-2003 giFT project (gift.sourceforge.net)
##
## This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
## under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
## Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any
## later version.
##
## This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
## WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
## MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
## General Public License for more details.
##
###############################################################################
  -->
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC '-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN'
  'file:///usr/share/sgml/docbook/dtd/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd'>
<article>
	<articleinfo>
		<title>giFT/OpenFT's Installation Guide for Windows</title>
	  <authorgroup>
			<author>
				<firstname>Ross</firstname>
				<surname>Smith</surname>
				<contrib>Original version</contrib>
			</author>
			<author>
				<firstname>Markus</firstname>
				<surname>Kern</surname>
				<contrib>Major revision</contrib>
			</author>
		</authorgroup>
		<abstract>
			<para>
				This document explains building giFT using Microsoft
				Visual Studio 6.0.
			</para>
		</abstract>
	</articleinfo>
	<sect1>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<para>
			A small notice to begin with.
			The windows port may not always be up to date with the rest of giFT
			and hence you are on your own when building giFT on windows. Do not
			ask for support or even binaries of giFT on windows!
		</para>
		<para>
			It is also important that you do not make windows binaries of giFT
			available. giFT/OpenFT is currently in a state which would make it
			crumble under the influx of the large number of users which a binary
			release for windows would most likely cause. If we think that
			giFT/OpenFT can handle a sufficient number of users we will make
			binaries for windows available.
		</para>
		<para>
			This guide describes how to build giFT on the command line.
			The Visual Studio IDE is not maintained and most likely won't work.
		</para>
		<para>
			You should create an empty directory in which the build environment
			will be set up. This directory will be referred to as "/" within
			this document.
		</para>
		<para>
			It is assumed that you are going to make a debug build. To turn
			debugging off (not recommended) added RELEASE=1 to
			<emphasis>all</emphasis> nmake invocations.
		</para>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>General preparation</title>
		<para>
			Before you can build giFT at the command line, make sure you have
			the following environmental variables defined:

			<screen>
	PATH=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VC98\Bin:%PATH%</screen>

			Optionally, you use can use the DOS 8.3 name:

			<screen>
	PATH=C:\PROGRA~1\MICROS~2\VC98\Bin:%PATH%</screen>

			Also define:

			<screen>
	LIB=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VC98\Lib:%LIB%
	INCLUDE=C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VC98\Include:%INCLUDE%</screen>

			In Windows 95/98/ME, add these statements to the
			<emphasis>end</emphasis> of <filename>C:\AUTOEXEC.BAT.</filename>

			In Windows NT/2000/XP, add these to the <emphasis>end</emphasis>
			of each environment variable (using
			<filename>Start/Settings/Control Panel/System/Advanced/Environment Variables/System</filename>).
		</para>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Getting giFT</title>
		<para>
			First you will need to download the latest giFT tarball from
			<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php">http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php</ulink>.
			Or optionally get it from cvs.
		</para>
		<para>
			Extract giFT to <filename>/giFT</filename> and proceed with installing
			the third party libraries.
		</para>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Preparing third party libraries</title>
		<para>
			There are a few third party libraries which you will need to
			build giFT
		</para>
		<sect2>
			<title>ZLib</title>
			<para>
				Zlib is used in several places by giFT, OpenFT and Gnutella.
			</para>
			<para>
				Get <ulink url="http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/libpng/zlib114.zip">http://prdownloads.sourceforge.net/libpng/zlib114.zip</ulink>
				and extract it to <filename>/zlib</filename>.
				Copy <filename>/giFT/win32/zlib.mak</filename> to
				<filename>/zlib</filename> and run:

				<screen>
	> cd /zlib
	> nmake /f zlib.mak</screen>

			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>Berkeley Database (libdb)</title>
			<para>
				OpenFT uses libdb for efficient data storage and access.
				If you want to function as a SEARCH node (a node that
				handles searches for other nodes) you'll
				<emphasis>need</emphasis> libdb. This document assumes you
				are using version 4.1.x.
			</para>
			<para>
				Get <ulink url="http://www.sleepycat.com/update/snapshot/db-4.1.25.zip">http://www.sleepycat.com/update/snapshot/db-4.1.25.zip</ulink>
				and extract it to <filename>/libdb</filename>.

				Follow the instructions in /libdb/docs/ref/build_win/intro.html to
				build both the Release and Debug DLL.
			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>libvorbis</title>
			<para>
				Meta data from Ogg Vorbis files is extracted using
				libvorbis.
			</para>
			<para>
				Get <ulink url="http://www.vorbis.com/files/1.0/windows/OggVorbis-win32sdk-1.0.zip">http://www.vorbis.com/files/1.0/windows/OggVorbis-win32sdk-1.0.zip</ulink>
				and extract it to <filename>/vorbis</filename>.

				No further steps are required.
			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>libxml2</title>
			<para>
				libxml2 is used by Gnutella for meta data support.
				You can skip his step if you don't want to compile Gnutella with
				meta data support. This is not recommended however.
			</para>
			<para>
				Get <ulink url="ftp://xmlsoft.org/libxml2-2.6.4.tar.gz">ftp://xmlsoft.org/libxml2-2.6.4.tar.gz</ulink>
				and extract it to <filename>/libxml2</filename>.
				The libxml2 configure script is written in JScript so make sure this
				works on your box (it should by default on all newer versions of windows).
				Go to <filename>/libxml2/win32</filename> and run:

				<screen>
	> cscript configure.js ftp=no http=no html=no catalog=no docb=no iconv=no 
	          valid=no xml_debug=no reader=no writer=no walker=no pattern=no 
	          compiler=msvc static=no schemas=no "cruntime=/MDd"
	> nmake /f Makefile.msvc</screen>

			</para>
		</sect2>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Building giFT</title>
		<para>
			Change to the giFT dir and build giFT using the following commands:

			<screen>
	> cd /giFT
	> nmake /f Makefile.msvc ZLIB=1 VORBIS=1 LIBDB=1 win32-dist</screen>

			This will create a directory <filename>/libgift</filename> which contains
			libraries and headers needed by plugins.
			It will also create <filename>/win32-dist</filename> to which we will
			come back later.
		</para>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Building the plugins</title>
		<para>
			In order for giFT to do anything usefull you will need one or more
			network plugins which giFT uses to connect to different filesharing
			networks.
		</para>
		<sect2>
			<title>Building OpenFT</title>
			<para>
				OpenFT is the primary network used with giFT
			</para>
			<para>
				Download the latest OpenFT tarball from
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php">http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php</ulink>.
				Or optionally get it from cvs.
			</para>
			<para>
				Extract OpenFT to <filename>/OpenFT</filename> and run

				<screen>
	> cd /OpenFT
	> nmake /f Makefile.msvc ZLIB=1 LIBDB=1 win32-dist</screen>

				This will build OpenFT and copy relevant files to
				<filename>/win32-dist</filename>.
			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>Building Gnutella</title>
			<para>
				The Gnutella plugin allows giFT to participate in the gnutella network.
			</para>
			<para>
				Download the latest Gnutella tarball from
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php">http://gift.sourceforge.net/download.php</ulink>.
				Or optionally get it from cvs.
			</para>
			<para>
				Extract Gnutella to <filename>/Gnutella</filename> and run

				<screen>
	> cd /Gnutella
	> nmake /f Makefile.msvc ZLIB=1 LIBXML2=1 win32-dist</screen>

				This will build Gnutella and copy relevant files to
				<filename>/win32-dist</filename>.
			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>Building giFT-FastTrack</title>
			<para>
				giFT-FastTrack is a plugin for connecting to the FastTrack network
				(Kazaa, imesh, etc.).
			</para>
			<para>
				Download the latest giFT-FastTrack tarball from
				<ulink url="http://developer.berlios.de/projects/gift-fasttrack">http://developer.berlios.de/projects/gift-fasttrack</ulink>.
				Or optionally get it from cvs.
			</para>
			<para>
				Extract giFT-FastTrack to <filename>/FastTrack</filename> and run

				<screen>
	> cd /FastTrack
	> nmake /f Makefile.msvc win32-dist</screen>

				This will build giFT-FastTrack and copy relevant files to
				<filename>/win32-dist</filename>.
			</para>
		</sect2>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Putting it all together</title>
		<para>
			This step will build a self extracting installer for giFT using
			the files in <filename>/win32-dist</filename>.
			If you do not build the installer you will have to set up a suitable
			environment for giFT to run in yourself.
		</para>
		<para>
			Get Nullsoft's Scriptable Install System from
			<ulink url="http://nsis.sourceforge.net">http://nsis.sourceforge.net</ulink>
			and install it on your system.
		</para>
		<para>
			Execute the following commands to build the installer:

			<screen>
	> cd /win32-dist
	> perl nsisprep.pl
	> MakeNSIS.exe gift.nsi</screen>
		</para>
		<para>
			Use the resulting package
			<filename>giFT-<emphasis>x.x.x</emphasis>.exe</filename> to install
			giFT on your machine.
		</para>
	</sect1>
	<sect1>
		<title>Miscellaneous</title>
		<sect2>
			<title>Logging</title>
			<para>
				giFT keeps a logfile
				<filename>giftd.log</filename> which contains
				information about both giFT and OpenFT (and any other plugins).
				This file is created on startup, so don't restart giFT
				immediately when it crashes, but check the log and report the
				problem.
			</para>
		</sect2>
		<sect2>
			<title>More information</title>
			<para>
				More information about the giFT project and giFT/OpenFT can be
				found in
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/docs.php">the other
				documentation</ulink> at our
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net">website</ulink>.
			</para>
			<para>
				If you want to learn about the interface protocol (that
				clients use to connect to giFT) read the
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/docs.php?document=interface.html">Interface Protocol documentation</ulink>.
				Please check other client projects first before starting your
				own.
			</para>
			<para>
				See the
				<ulink url="http://gift.sourceforge.net/contact.php">contact</ulink>
				page for more information about the preferable ways to ask for
				help and/or contact us.
			</para>
		</sect2>
	</sect1>
</article>
