<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!--
vim:softtabstop=2:filetype=xml:tw=110:sw=2:
-*- html -*-
-->
<!DOCTYPE article PUBLIC '-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.1.2//EN'
    'file:///usr/share/sgml/docbook/dtd/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd'>
<!-- 'http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.1.2/docbookx.dtd'> -->
<article>
<articleinfo>
  <title>giFT's Interface Protocol -- Draft</title>
  <authorgroup>
    <author><firstname>Josh</firstname><surname>Guilfoyle</surname></author>
    <author><firstname>Eelco</firstname><surname>Lempsink</surname></author>
  </authorgroup>
  <abstract>
    <para>
      This document is a draft of the specifications of giFT's new Interface
      Protocol. Using this for implementing a parser is at your own risk. As it
      is anyway.
    </para>
  </abstract>
</articleinfo>
<sect1 id="sect_syntax">
  <title>SYNTAX</title>
  <sect2>
    <title>Commands</title>
    <para>
      The interface protocol works by sending specific commands over a
      socket.  The basic syntax of both queries and responses is the same.
      A complete command block ends with a <literal>;</literal>:
      <synopsis>  <command>COMMAND</command>;</synopsis>
    </para>
    <para>
      Some commands require an id.  You need to send this as an argument
      (between parenthesis, no quotes) to the command: 
      <synopsis>  <command>COMMAND</command>(argument);</synopsis>.
      See <xref linkend="session-ids" label="session-ide.title"/> for information about using ids.
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Keys</title>
    <para>
      Most commands have a set of keys.  A key often has a value, in the
      form of an argument, but this is not required.
      <synopsis>
  <command>COMMAND</command>
     key1(argument)
     key2
  ;</synopsis>
      Whitespace (outside arguments) isn't important, so that command could have
      also been written as: 
      <synopsis>  <command>COMMAND</command> key1 (argument) key2;</synopsis>
      Order doesn't matter either, so even
      <synopsis>  <command>COMMAND</command> key2 key1 (argument);</synopsis>
      is syntactically correct. More information about whitespace and order
      <link linkend="ws-and-order">later</link>.
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Subcommands</title>
    <para>
      Besides keys (or you could say "as a special key") there are
      subcommands.  A subcommand has a set of keys (with arguments) between
      braces ({ and }) as a argument.  The keys of a subcommand have the same
      syntax as keys of a normal command. A subcommand can have a normal
      argument itself too.
      <synopsis>
  <command>COMMAND</command>
     key1
     <command>SUBCOMMAND</command> (argument) {
        subkey1
        subkey2(argument)
     }
  ;</synopsis>
    </para>
    <para>
      A subcommand can even have a subcommand itself (that would make it a
      subsubcommand). Information about how you should parse that is in <xref
      linkend="tree"/>.
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Modifiers</title>
    <para>
      A modifier is like an option.  It tells something about how to
      interpret the data of a command, key or subcommand.  Modifiers are
      surrounded by brackets ([ and ]). As with arguments, whitespace inside
      modifier brackets will not be ignored (as is the case for the rest of the
      protocol).
      <synopsis>
  <command>COMMAND</command> [mod]
     <command>SUBCOMMAND</command> [mod] {
        key [mod]
     }
  ;</synopsis>
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Definitions</title>
    <para>
      As an overview, here are the definitions of all used objects (bottom-up).
      The <literal>*</literal>, <literal>+</literal> and <literal>?</literal>
      are used a special chars, and have the same meaning as they would have in
      a regular expression
      <footnote id="regexpchars">
        <para>
          <literal>*</literal>, <literal>+</literal> and <literal>?</literal>
          mean "zero or more times", "one or more times", "zero times or one
          time" respectively.
        </para>
      </footnote>
      . 
      Remember again, order and whitespace don't matter (except inside an
      argument or a modifier group).  Of course, you must use the command,
      subcommand or key before its argument and modifier.  The only time you'll
      actually need whitespace is when the command is directly followed by a
      key. 
    </para>
    <sect3>
      <title>Key</title>
      <synopsis role="oneliner">
  key [modifier]? (argument)?</synopsis>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Subcommand</title>
      <synopsis role="oneliner">
  <command>SUBCOMMAND</command> [modifier]? (argument)? { key+ SUBCOMMAND* }</synopsis>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Command</title>
      <synopsis role="oneliner">
  <command>COMMAND</command> [modifier]? (argument)? key* SUBCOMMAND* ;</synopsis>    
    </sect3>
    <para>
      <literal>key</literal>, <literal>SUBCOMMAND</literal> and
      <literal>COMMAND</literal> are replaceable by any string matching
      <literal>\w[\d\w_]*</literal>
      <footnote>
        <para>
          This means that it must start with a letter (case doesn't matter),
          which can be followed by more letters, numbers and an underscore
          (<literal>_</literal>).
        </para>
      </footnote>
      .
      <literal>argument</literal> and
      <literal>modifier</literal> can contain any character, but
      <literal>(</literal>, <literal>)</literal>, <literal>[</literal>,
      <literal>]</literal>, <literal>{</literal>, <literal>}</literal>,
      <literal>;</literal> and <literal>\</literal> must be <link
      linkend="escaping">escaped</link>.
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2 id="parsing">
    <title>Things you should know when parsing</title>
    <sect3 id="ws-and-order">
      <title>Whitespace and order</title>
      <para>
        Whitespace outside arguments and modifiers is not important. All whitespace is treated the same, namely
        as a single space ('<literal> </literal>'). You can consider whitespace as a 'token-seperator'.
      </para>
      <para>
        Order isn't important either, it doesn't really matter in what the order
        is of the keys, and, less trivial, you can send the modifier, argument and
        the set of keys (for subcommands) in any order. 
      </para>
      <para>
        Time for an example. This:
        <synopsis>
  <command>SEARCH</command>(4)
     query (foo  bar)
     realm (audio)  [==]
     <command>META</command> {
           bitrate[>=](192)foo[bar ](bla)
     } [c owns]
       (me)
     bla      ( blum! )     ;</synopsis>
        Is actually just the same as this:
        <synopsis>
  <command>SEARCH</command> (4) 
     query (foo  bar)
     realm [==] (audio)
     <command>META</command> [c owns] (me) {
         bitrate [>=] (192)
         foo [bar ] (bla)
     }
     bla ( blum! )
  ;</synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3 id="escaping">
      <title>Escaping</title>
      <para>
        By this time, you should have asked yourself "But what if I, for example,
        want to include a ')' in an argument?", but even if you didn't, here's
        what:
      </para>
      <para>
        Each argument and modifying attribute in the protocol must be encoded by
        escaping <literal>(</literal>, <literal>)</literal>,
        <literal>[</literal>, <literal>]</literal>, <literal>{</literal>,
        <literal>}</literal>, <literal>;</literal> and <literal>\</literal> to
        ensure that only cleanly parsable text is present. Escaping in this
        context means that you must put <literal>\</literal> directly for the
        special character. An example:
        <synopsis>
  <command>COMMAND</command>[\(very\) special]
     key(arg\(ument\))
     <command>SUBCOMMAND</command> (/\{dude\}\\)
        subkey[\;\;\;]
  ;</synopsis>
        Note that you'll have to escape every the characters in every context, so
        you'll have to escape a <literal>)</literal> even if it's part of a
        modifier (between <literal>[]</literal>).
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3 id="tree">
      <title>Hug a tree</title>
      <para>
        As you've seen, the protocol is designed in such a way that requires
        parsers to organize (recursively) a list of keys and their values.  A key
        value may include a list of other keys, therefore constructing a tree-like
        parsing method is ideal.
      </para>
    </sect3>
  </sect2>
</sect1>
<sect1 id="sect_protocol">
  <title>PROTOCOL</title>
  <sect2>
    <title>Notations</title>
    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <literal><command>(SUB)COMMAND</command></literal>.          
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <literal>*</literal>, <literal>+</literal>, <literal>?</literal>. 'meta-characters'<footnoteref
          linkend="regexpchars"/>, don't include these.
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <literal><replaceable>replaceable text</replaceable></literal>
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <literal><optional>optional subcommands/arguments/attributes</optional></literal>
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <synopsis role="oneliner" label="client">Data sent by the client</synopsis>
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <synopsis role="oneliner" label="server">Data sent by the server</synopsis>
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <synopsis role="oneliner">Data that can be sent by both the client and the server</synopsis> 
        </para>
      </listitem>
      <listitem>
        <para>
          <synopsis role="oneliner"><textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>variable</term>
                <listitem><para>explanation or a link to the first explanation</para></listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
        </para>
      </listitem>
    </itemizedlist>
  </sect2>
  <sect2 id="attaching">
    <title>Attaching Connections</title>
    <sect3 id="session-ids">
      <title id="session-ids.title">Session-Specific Event Identifiers</title>
      <para>
        Event identifiers are requested by the client (with a few exceptions) and will be considered
        session-specific.  The response of the server will use the same id as the client requested.  This
        completely eliminates the need to wait on the servers event response, and consequently the command
        completely.  All session-specific id's must be unique (to that session) and must not overlap.  This
        means you'll have to keep track of all used ids, the ones specified by your client, and the ones giFT
        uses,  
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3 id="attach">
      <title>Attach</title>
      <para>
        In order to take advantage of the event identifiers (and therefore
        multiple events per socket), giFT clients are expected to register this
        as an active single-socket session with the daemon.  This is done via the
        ATTACH request, described below:
        <synopsis label="client">
  <command>ATTACH</command>
     <optional>client(<replaceable>client</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional>version(<replaceable>client version</replaceable>)</optional>
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
<!--     <optional>profile(<replaceable>profile</replaceable>)</optional>
              <varlistentry id="profile">
                <term>profile</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    giFT specific configuration profile.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
-->
              <varlistentry id="client">
                <term>client</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The name of your client. This can be used to gather statistics
                    on the use of different clients, but that's not (yet) implemented.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="client_version">
                <term>client version</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Your client's version.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
        Client and version are expected to be your formal client name and version
        identifier.  Upon seeing this request, the server will reply with:
        <synopsis label="server">
  <command>ATTACH</command>
     server(<replaceable>server</replaceable>)
     version(<replaceable>server version</replaceable>)
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry id="server">
                <term>server</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The name of the server, this will be 'giFT'.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="server_version">
                <term>server version</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    giFT's version. This can be important if certain parts of this
                    protocol change, and you want your client to support it.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3 id="detach">
      <title>Detach</title>
      <para>
        You may also request an explicit detach from the session which will
        result in the connections closure from the server.  Please note that this
        request is ignored if the session is not attached.  This request is
        simply:
        <synopsis label="client">
  <command>DETACH</command>;</synopsis>
      </para>
        Of course, the server, and with it all uploads and downloads, will keep
        running.
    </sect3>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Finding files</title>
    <sect3>
      <title>Search</title>
      <para>
          The most basic way of finding files, is just a plain search.  This is done by using the
          <command>SEARCH</command> (as you already guessed).  Valid options for a search are as follows:
          <synopsis label="client">
  <command>SEARCH</command> (<optional><replaceable>session-id</replaceable></optional>)
     query (<replaceable>tokens</replaceable>)
     <optional>exclude (<replaceable>tokens</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional>realm (<replaceable>realm</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional>protocol (<replaceable>protocol</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional><command>META</command> {
        <replaceable>key_name</replaceable> <optional>[<replaceable>attribute</replaceable>]</optional> (<replaceable>value</replaceable>)
    </optional>
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry id="session-id">
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The (client)session specific id. (See <xref linkend="session-ids"/>)
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="tokens">
                <term>tokens</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Search (or exclude) tokens. Of course, when the protocol you're searching doesn't
                    do tokenized searches, it will be regarded as one token.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="realm">
                <term>realm</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The realm to search. This can be <literal>everything</literal>, <literal>audio</literal>,
                    <literal>video</literal>, <literal>images</literal>, <literal>text documents</literal>,
                    <literal>software</literal>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="protocol">
                <term>protocol</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The protocol you want to use or is used (exclusively).
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Browse</title>
      <para>
        The <command>BROWSE</command> command carries the same options and basic structure as the
        <command>SEARCH</command> command.  The server may safely treat both searches and browses identically
        except when presenting the request to the protocol, which should assume these operations are quite
        different.  The data received from the querying requests is identical in form.
      </para>
      <para>
        The common use of <command>BROWSE</command> is to specify a protocol specific identifier for a user as
        the <literal>query</literal>.  As with <command>SEARCH</command>, you can limit the request by using
        keys as <literal>realm</literal>, for example.
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Locate</title>
      <para>
        <command>LOCATE</command> also follows the same basic structure as the <command>SEARCH</command>
        command. The main difference is its options. <command>LOCATE</command> only specifies
        <literal>query</literal>, and optionally <literal>protocol</literal>.
      </para>
      <para>
        The purpose of <command>LOCATE</command> is to find different sources for the same file. Use a file
        hash as its <literal>query</literal>.
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Results</title>
      <para>
        The server replies to <command>SEARCH</command>, <command>BROWSE</command> and
        <command>LOCATE</command> with the following:
        <synopsis label="server">
  <command>ITEM</command> (<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)
     user (<replaceable>username</replaceable>)
     node (<replaceable>server</replaceable>)
     <optional>availability (<replaceable>availability</replaceable>)</optional> 
     size (<replaceable>filesize</replaceable>)
     <optional>hash (<replaceable>hash</replaceable>)</optional> 
     url (<replaceable>protocol specific url</replaceable>)
     <optional>mime (<replaceable>mime-type</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional><command>META</command> {
       <replaceable>name</replaceable> (<replaceable>value</replaceable>)
     }</optional> 
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="session-id"/> and <xref linkend="session-ids"/>. This is the same id as
                    you specified for the <command>SEARCH</command>;.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="username">
                <term>username</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Specific user you're downloading from. For protocol that don't use
                    username's this will most likely be the ip of the host.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="node">
                <term>server</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The 'server' this result is found on. For centralized networks this is the server,
                    for semi-centralized networks the node the search result came from and for
                    decentralized networks the exact 'peer'.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="availability">
                <term>availability</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The number of open 'slots' on the remote host. !FIXME! (add more text)
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="filesize">
                <term>filesize</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The size of the file in bytes. Very useful for lots of things ;-)
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="mime">
                <term>mime-type</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The mime-type of the file. Only returned if the protocol supports it, of course.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="hash">
                <term>hash</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The hash of the file. This can be used to find exactly similar files so that
                    multiple sources can be used for a download. (Again, if supported by the
                    protocol).  Use this value for 'grouping' files.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="url">
                <term>protocol specific url</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    An URL that point to a file in a format specific for the protocol of
                    the network it's on.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
        When giFT has returned all search results, an empty <command>ITEM</command> will be sent:
        <synopsis label="server" role="oneliner">  <command>ITEM</command>(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>);</synopsis>
        To cancel a search manually use any of the searching commands with a 'cancel' action, for example:
        <synopsis label="client" role="oneliner">  <command>SEARCH</command>(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>) action(cancel);</synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Meta data</title>
      <para>
        The <literal>META</literal> subcommand will contain a set of keys that
        are applicable for this type of file (if known). Those keys are not 
        hardcoded, so you'll have to find a creative way of parsing those.
        You could for example hardcode a few keys certain mime categories such
        as 'artist' and 'title' for <literal>audio/*</literal>, and match meta
        keys that contain those values. Just an idea.
      </para>
    </sect3>
  </sect2>
  <sect2 id="transfers">
    <title>Transferring files</title>
    <sect3>
      <title>New transfers</title>
      <para>
        When initiating transfers you must send all sources that are to be used in the form described below.
        You should note that a download will be instantiated when the first source is seen.  Protocols which
        do not support hashes will always create a new transfer when an <command>ADDSOURCE</command> command
        is given.
        <synopsis label="client">
  <command>ADDSOURCE</command>
     user (<replaceable>username</replaceable>)
     <optional>hash (<replaceable>hash</replaceable>)</optional>
     size (<replaceable>filesize</replaceable>)
     url (<replaceable>url</replaceable>)
     <optional>save (<replaceable>save</replaceable>)</optional>
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>username</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="username"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>hash</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="hash"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>filesize</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="filesize"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>url</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="url"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="save">
                <term>save</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The location to save the file too. Do not include a path, it'll be
                    put in the completed directory.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
      <para>
        The protocol uses one generic format for new transfers, <command>dir_ADD</command>, where
        <command>dir</command> is the direction of the transfer, namely <command>DOWNLOAD</command> or
        <command>UPLOAD</command>.  On <command>ATTACH;</command>, the <command>dir_ADD</command>s for all
        current transfers will be dumped.
        <synopsis label="server" id="trans_add">
  <command>dir_ADD</command> (<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)
     <optional>hash (<replaceable>hash</replaceable>)</optional>
     state (<replaceable>state</replaceable>)
     transmit (<replaceable>transmited</replaceable>)
     size (<replaceable>filesize</replaceable>)
     file (<replaceable>save</replaceable>)
     <optional>shared (<replaceable>shared</replaceable>)</optional>
     <command>SOURCE</command>* { 
        user (<replaceable>username</replaceable>)
        url (<replaceable>url</replaceable>)
        <optional>protocol (<replaceable>protocol</replaceable>)</optional> 
        status (<replaceable>status</replaceable>)
        start (<replaceable>chunk start</replaceable>) 
        transmit (<replaceable>chunk transmit</replaceable>)
        total (<replaceable>chunk total</replaceable>)
     }
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="session-id"/> and <xref linkend="session-ids"/>. This id is specified
                    by the server and can be used to 'track' a download.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>hash</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="hash"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="state">
                <term>state</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    <literal>Active</literal>, <literal>Paused</literal> or <literal>Completed</literal>. See
                    <xref linkend="pausing"/> for more information about pausing transfers.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="transmit">
                <term>transmit</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Number of bytes transmitted.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>filesize</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="filesize"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="file">
                <term>file</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The file being transfered, only the filename, no path.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="shared">
                <term>shared</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Boolean value (<literal>0</literal>|<literal>1</literal>) indicating whether or not the
                    file is explicitly shared. Only for <literal>UPLOAD</literal>s.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
              <term>username</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="username"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>url</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="url"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>protocol</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="protocol"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="status">
                <term>status</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The status of the chunk. Can be one of the following: <literal>Active</literal>,
                    <literal>Waiting</literal>, <literal>Paused</literal>, <literal>Queued</literal>,
                    <literal>Queued (Remotely)</literal>, <literal>Queued (<replaceable>queue
                    position</replaceable>)</literal>, <literal>Complete</literal>, <literal>Cancelled
                    (Remotely)</literal>, <literal>Timed out</literal>. The UI should only calculate the
                    average transfer speed if <literal>status</literal> is <literal>Active</literal>. 
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="start">
                <term>start</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    If the source is a chunk of the file, start contains the bytelocation this chunk starts.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="total">
                <term>total</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    The bytelocation the chunk ends.
                    <replaceable>start</replaceable>-<replaceable>total</replaceable> can be seen as a range.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Reports</title>
      <para>
        Reporting of a transfer's progress will be done in a similar way for uploads and downloads. In fact,
        the format looks a lot like <command>dir_ADD</command>'s, only with a minor addition. The command for
        reports is <command>dir_CHANGE</command> (That means, <command>UPLOAD_CHANGE</command> or
        <command>DOWNLOAD_CHANGE</command>. Please note that <command>dir_CHANGE</command> will only be sent
        when something actually changed. By default it will not be sent more than once a second. 
        <synopsis label="server" id="trans_change">
  <command>dir_CHANGE</command>(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)
     throughput (<replaceable>throughput</replaceable>) 
     elapsed (<replaceable>elapsed</replaceable>)
     ...
     [dir_ADD's body]
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="session-id"/> and <xref linkend="session-ids"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="throughput">
                <term>throughput</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Number of bytes transferred since last <command>dir_CHANGE</command>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="elapsed">
                <term>elapsed</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    Number of milliseconds elapsed since last <command>dir_CHANGE</command>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3 id="pausing">
      <title>Pausing / Cancelling</title>
      <para>
        To cancel a transfer (both uploads and downloads):
        <synopsis label="client">
  <command>TRANSFER</command>(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)
     action (<replaceable>action</replaceable>)
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="session-id"/> and <xref linkend="session-ids"/>. Retrieve this info
                    from the information <command>DONWLOADS</command>; and <command>UPLOADS</command>; dump.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry id="transfer_action">
                <term>action</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    <literal>cancel</literal>, <literal>pause</literal> or <literal>unpause</literal>. Pretty
                    self-explainatory, right? :-)
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
      <para>
        For downloads, you can also cancel only one source. This is done with the <command>DELSOURCE</command>
        command:
        <synopsis label="client">
  <command>DELSOURCE(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)</command>
     url (<replaceable>url</replaceable>)
  ;
          <textobject>
            <variablelist>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>session-id</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="session-id"/> and <xref linkend="session-ids"/>. 
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
              <varlistentry>
                <term>url</term>
                <listitem>
                  <para>
                    See <xref linkend="url"/>.
                  </para>
                </listitem>
              </varlistentry>
            </variablelist>
          </textobject></synopsis>
      </para>
    </sect3>
    <sect3>
      <title>Finished transfers</title>
      <para>
        When a transfer finished (because it has completed or has been cancelled), the
        <command>dir_DEL</command> (<command>UPLOAD_DEL</command> or <command>DOWNLOAD_DEL</command>) command
        will be sent. It's format is clear and simple:
        <synopsis label="server" role="oneliner">  <command>dir_DEL(<replaceable>session-id</replaceable>)</command>;</synopsis>        
        </para>
    </sect3>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Shared Files</title>
    <para>
      To manipulate the shares index you may use:
      <synopsis label="client">
  <command>SHARE</command>
     <optional>action (<replaceable>action</replaceable>)</optional> 
  ;
        <textobject>
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry id="share_action">
              <term>action</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  <literal>sync</literal>, <literal>hide</literal> or <literal>show</literal>. If
                  <literal>action()</literal> is omitted, all your shares will be dumped as
                  <command>ITEM</command>s.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
        </textobject></synopsis>
      <!-- TODO: define ITEMs SHARE returns (?) -->
      The server will return the action that is currently processing on ALL
      share changes.  I'll explain myself later.
      <synopsis label="server">
  <command>SHARE</command>
     <optional>action (<replaceable>action</replaceable>)</optional>
     <optional>status (<replaceable>action status</replaceable>)</optional>
  ;
        <textobject>
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry>
              <term>action</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  See <xref linkend="share_action"/>. No <literal>action()</literal> means there's nothing going on. 
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
            <varlistentry id="action_status">
              <term>action status</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  The status of the current action. Only shown if <literal>action (sync)</literal>. Lists a
                  percentage (including the <literal>%</literal> sign).
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
        </textobject></synopsis>
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Protocol Statistics</title>
    <para>
      Request stats dump explicitly (abstract):
      <synopsis label="client" role="abstract"> 
  <command>STATS</command>
     <replaceable>protocol</replaceable>*
  ;
        <textobject>
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry id="protocol_stats">
              <term>protocol</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  The name of the protocol(s) to request the stats from. Use <literal>giFT</literal> for local
                  stats. If no protocols are given, stats for all protocols will be returned.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
        </textobject></synopsis>
      Stats response:
      <synopsis label="server"> 
  <command>STATS</command>
     <replaceable>protocol</replaceable>* {
        <optional>users (<replaceable>users</replaceable>)</optional> 
        files (<replaceable>files</replaceable>)
        size  [<replaceable>unit</replaceable>] (<replaceable>total size</replaceable>)
  ;
        <textobject>
          <variablelist>
            <varlistentry>
              <term>protocol</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  See <xref linkend="protocol_stats"/>.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
            <varlistentry id="users">
              <term>users</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  Number of users.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
            <varlistentry id="files">
              <term>files</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  Number of files.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
            <varlistentry id="total_size">
              <term>total size</term>
              <listitem>
                <para>
                  The total size of all files (float). <replaceable>unit</replaceable> contains the unit, like
                  KB, MB, GB. If not given, assume <literal>GB</literal>.
                </para>
              </listitem>
            </varlistentry>
          </variablelist>
        </textobject></synopsis>
    </para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Configuration File Manipulation</title>
    <para>TODO</para>
  </sect2>
  <sect2>
    <title>Exiting</title>
    <para>
      To shutdown giFT, you can use the <command>QUIT</command> command:
      <synopsis label="client" role="oneliner">  <command>QUIT</command>;</synopsis>
      Simple as that. Please note that unlike <link linkend="detach"><command>DETACH</command>;</link>, all
      transfers will be stopped too. (giFT automatically resumes downloads, for protocols that support it, on
      start up.)
    </para>
  </sect2>
</sect1>
</article>
