$Id: README,v 1.2 2001/11/28 14:43:48 jasta Exp $

                                    OpenFT
                    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~


TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
-------------------

OpenFT is an open source implementation of a distributed peer to peer file
sharing network.  It is similar in design to gnutella with significantly
improved scalability based on a concept of hierarchal node classification.
This node classification is determined by each individual node based on the
resources that node has to donate to the Free Transport network (FT).  The 
advantage of OpenFT over other major networks (such as KaZaa) is that we do
not require authentication on a centralized network.

Another key feature of the OpenFT network is that search results and share
submission transactions will be compressed with the GZ compression technology.
This is done to allow speedy search results and submissions into the network.


NODE CLASSIFICATION
-------------------

OpenFT's node classification system is designed in such a way that each higher
level classification inherits the responsibilities of all lower node
classifications.  For example, a user node that has connected to the network
for the first time (explained later) will receive a list of search nodes upon
request.  At any later time if that node promotes to a search node itself, it
will still maintain the connections with those search nodes that it once held
as a user node for two main network goals.  One is that if the person using
the search node machine wishes to request a search themselves (remember they
are still maintaining the functionality of a user node), they will use the
node connections that all user nodes maintain.  The sceond feature this allows
for is that all connecting user nodes may request a search and have that list
of supernodes returned to them, thus recursing the system to a user-defined
depth.

Every node is expected to maintain a list of (and/or connections to)
supernodes at all times.  The client default will be set at 25.  This
functionality is not reduced when that node is promoted to a supernode or even
an index node, responsibilites are only added, not removed.  All nodes must
also be responsible for maintaining a relatively large index of all user and
supernodes for reference when they need re-entry back into the network (as to
avoid using index nodes if at all possible).


USER NODE
---------

User nodes can be considered the "base" node classification for the entire
network.  User nodes generally only make outgoing connections to search nodes
and perform searches as well as maintain lists of nodes that have passed
through them (client default is set to a maximum of 100), however on initial
connection into the network they have a few more responsibilities.

The first of these is that they must be hardcoded for a list of default search
and index nodes.  They will immediately spawn connections to each node on the
static list and attempt to replace them with the node links provided by the
new connections.  This is a critical first-time operation as relying on
hardcoded servers forces each client release to be reliant on a static set of
IPs.  It's important that this dependancy be broken as soon as possible by the
client and begins maintaining its own references into the network.

Regular user nodes must also submit their list of shares for storage (and
hashing) to any outgoing search node connections that are established from the
known network references.


SEARCH NODE
-----------

Search nodes can easily be considered the "backbone" of the entire network.
They are responsible for handling incoming connections from user nodes (yes,
this means you MUST be exposed to the Internet directly) that supply a
compressed list of files.  For scalability purposes, the client default will
be set to maintain a list of only 300 users per search node.  This allows the
search node machine to operate on the OpenFT network with as minimal overhead
as possible.

Any user node across the entire network may at any time spawn a connection to
a search node and request that it hash it's internal list of files and return
results accompanied with the ip:port of the user (port being 0 if the user is
firewalled, see FIREWALLED USERS).  Prior to this operation however, search
nodes respond with it's list of search nodes (maintained at 25 by default) as
to instruct the user where it can optionally find more search results if
required (defaults to attempting up to 100 search node connections).  This
system allows search nodes to only ever have to handle the traffic generated
by their shared list and thus does not require any form of tunnelling of
search results, which would result in wasted network load if the user himself
can request the same operation from the search node.

Search nodes also have an extra advantage over user nodes in maintaing a
robust list of search nodes (again, for re-entrance into the network) as they
will optionally request the search node list from any incoming user node
connection.  As a result of this advantage, search nodes will maintain lists
of new search nodes and will flush them every 5 minutes (default) while
sending them down to all connected user nodes.


INDEX NODE
----------

The final and probably least important node classification is that of the
semi-static index node.  These nodes are not automatically determined by the
network or the client but are selected on a reviewed opt-in basis.  These
nodes will maintain an unlimited list of all seen supernodes and will
regularly communicate with search nodes when a new promotion has occurred (so
that it can now list them).  These nodes are also referenced for "lazy" nodes
who do not have any pre-determined network references left alive.


CLASS PROMOTION
---------------

Promotion is still a very vague subject in the OpenFT implementation.
Currently our line of thinking is leading us towards a semi-trusted system
where the client daemon will monitor simple data about the user node.  Mainly,
the avg, high, and low k/s reported by this user both incoming and outgoing.
If the usage hits a pre-determined thresh-hold the node will make a request to
all connected supernodes that it has now received a promotion.  All search
nodes aware will connect to their respective search and index nodes with a
simple message indicating a new supernode IP.  The user node undergoing
promotion will then request that any 5 search nodes connect back to verify
connection speed and the ability to bind outgoing internet ports (ie not
firewalled).  It is still undecided but quite likely that the client will be
trusted to perform an internal list hashing test to insure that it indeed can
handle the load of the configured user count.


FIREWALLED USERS
----------------

Users that do not have access to a direct internet connection (by way of a NAT
machine or otherwise) will _NOT_ be allowed to become search nodes but will
still operate fully on the network.  Their only limitation is that they will
not be able to download from another firewalled user (the only other way
around this would be to tunnel data via supernodes which has been determined
that it stresses the network too much to be practical).

Indirectly connected users may still upload files by a push upload system
implemented in conjuction with the search node.  Clients are expected to store
the search node that returned each result so that upon download request that
node can be contacted and asked to deliver a message to the node required for
uploading.  That supernode will return an error message back if unable to
contact the given node, otherwise will return nothing.  If the user node in
question is behaving properly it will make an outgoing connection to the
downloading node and will then proceed to push the requested file (after a
brief header describing the nature of the operation, as is standard for all
communication delivered to a user node directly).


DOWNLOADING
-----------

Downloads are divided among all hosts that have matched the same md5sum from a
search result.  In order to prevent poisoned files from corrupted the whole a
preliminary size and offset is calculated by the downloading agent and
requests those offsets from each host.  The data segment matches from the
majority of hosts is accepted to be the true file.


CONTACT INFORMATION
-------------------

OpenProjects IRC Network (irc.openprojects.net) #giFT
